---
layout: post
title: Smart Devices are Situated in the World
---

# Situated in the World

We said earlier that smart devices should have easy-to-use UIs.

But there is a second characteristic of smart devices that makes them
different from most other UI-heavy applications: being embedded
devices, they are somehow situated in the real world and must react to
this world--- even at the same time that a user is interacting with
them. Depending on the application and purpose of the smart device,
this responsiveness is an integral part of the product's user
experience.

# Sensors and actuators

Smart devices are embedded systems; they are situated in the real
world. They experience physical phenomena through sensors: touch,
pressure, light, and so on. They might also be able to exert some sort
of actions on to the world in the form of sending currents to motors,
making lights blink, etc.  Their actions can either be directly or
indirectly under the control by users, or autonomous, based on their
internal state and software.

When a user is interacting with a smart device, they usually want to
see the current state of the world reflected accurately in the user
interface.  In fact, half of the time, monitoring the state of some
real-world phenomenon is the only goal of the user. For example, a
vehicle's fuel gauge is a simple embedded device that senses the level
of fluid in the tank and transmits a signal to a second embedded
device, which converts the information to a numeric or text summary,
or into an electrical signal that moves a needle, for the driver.
This example is not of a device that we might call "smart" here,
because these embedded systems are not doing much with the sensed
information beyond transforming it and directly connecting it to the
dashboard.

